Title: The PATH environemnt variable in Windows  
Author: Fábio Fortkamp  
Date: 2016-03-01  
Category: Article  
Tags: unix, windows  
Slug: path  
Status: published  
Series: Scientific programming in Windows  

If you are one of the people who read this blog, you may have noticed that a recent obsession of mine is the mixing of Unix and Windows. As I've said a couple of times, I've been moving from an Apple-only system to a more diverse environment (primarily due to portability and cost reasons); today, my main use case is Windows as the "PC" system  and Android as the "mobile". However, in this move I've been bringing my Unix experience from my Mac years (and Linux before that) to try to enhance the use of Windows for programming and scientific computing, and I've been surprising myself with the results. Expect this to become a regular theme here.

One things that motivates me to write these things is that Windows users are not so much experienced with this Unix philoshophy, contrary to Mac (power) users. Hence, in the following texts I will talk more and more about how to configure Windows to do all sorts of things, in the hope that OS X users will know to find their way. I cannot try to cover both systems for every topic I write about. Also, I try to cover concepts and not so much specifics of platforms.

This series about Jupyter is my guide along the way. For me, the power of using Jupyter on Windows comprehends the essence of using Unix in Windows: you work through the terminal (using any shell), using a command-line utility that is internally a server that communicates with text-based tools. In [the last post](http://thermocode.net/blog/terminal/), we talked about using the terminal as an interface to the operating system. You type commands, a shell interprets them and sends the command to the processor, which executes the task - mainly manipulating files in our examples. Today we will talk about opening programs and the shell finds them.

I'm assuming you have already installed [Git for Windows](https://git-for-windows.github.io/) and know how to open the Git Bash terminal (I'm assuming bash as the shell in almost every example I talk about). You may have to choose something about "setting the PATH", and that will come to our attention again when we install Python and Jupyter. What is that?

The PATH is an *environment variable*, global configuration that changes the way your computer works. In the case of PATH, it's a list of directories that Windows searches for when you request a program. For example, if open a terminal (any terminal, including `cmd.exe`) and type the name of a program such as `rm`, how does the shell knows what to do? It cannot possible look in every folder in your computer as this would take forever. It searches for files named `rm.exe` (since that's how programs are named in Windows) and if it finds one, it executes the program.

Naturally you can call the `rm` program even if it's not in the PATH --  you just have to specify the full path (the address in the file system, not the environment variable). For example, if `rm` is installed as `C:\Program Files\Git\usr\bin\rm.exe` (as it happens in my computer), and this directory is not listed in the PATH, typing `rm` will not work, but typing the whole path will. In fact, if you know the full path of any program, you should be able to open it from bash; try typing something like `"C:\Program Files (x86)\Google\Chrome\Application\chrome.exe"`.

If you type something in bash and press `Enter`, the shell tries to find out what you mean. If it seems like a full address, it tries to execute it (unless the specified file does not exist, or what you type is not a file). It can be an *alias*, a shortcut that you can define (I will not cover aliases in this post, but you can search for help if you interested in what they can do). It can be a shell *function*, which I'll also not cover. If it's not an alias, a function or a full path, it tries to find the name of what it typed in the PATH variable. I'm not sure of the exact order, but you get the point. And if bash does not find the program, it issues a message like `command not found`.

The power of knowing how to configure the PATH is that, when we talk later about running the `jupyter` command, everybody should be able to run it, regardless of where's installed, and without having to type `C:\Program Files\...` every time in the terminal. You install it correctly, put the directory in the PATH, and you are done. You could also write a script that uses these commands like `rm` and `jupyter`, send it to a friend, and it should be able to execute it *even if* she is running Linux for example, as long as her PATH is well configured. It makes things much more portable.

Since I'm used to Windows 7 but there are newer versions, I will leave you with links on how to alter the PATH (and other environent variables) on these versions. [This page](https://java.com/en/download/help/path.xml) covers Windows 7 and 8, and [this Super User question](https://superuser.com/questions/949560/how-do-i-set-system-environment-variables-in-windows-10) shows how to do it for Windows 10. Beware, though, that these pages explain how to alter the *system* PATH. To avoid disturbing other uses, I personally like to create a "PATH" in the *user* variables group (shown in the screenshots above the system group) and alter this value. You can copy folders addresses in Explorer and paste them in the text box, not forgetting to use the semi-colin `;` to separate folders. The order of directories in the PATH list is important; the shell will look for programs in the directories in the order they are listed (first from the systems's and then the user's PATH), and executes the first found. This is useful for keeping multiple versions of programs installed, with one as the default. To access the other, you just have to type the full path. 

You might need to re-install Git for Windows, to check all boxes that say it will install all Unix tools and add things to the front of the PATH (in my experience, it's safe to ignore the warnings about "overridding Windows behaviour", since you are not uninstalling anything); you can leave the other configurations as the default. You want the full power of the shell! Next, how to *properly* install Python under Windows, since this is a mess.
