Title: Being open while private  
Author: Fábio Fortkamp  
Date: 2015-11-26  
Category: Article  
Tags: jupyter, programming, work  
Slug: open  
Status: published  
Series: Scientific programming in Windows  

There is one aspect of working with [Jupyter](http://jupyter.org/) notebooks, which I began to explain [in the last post](http://thermocode.net/blog/jupyter/), that I want to emphasize. It's a work philosophy that I've been developing in the past months (with ideas from many people), and which I call *being open while private*.

I'm not a very social person. I have a girlfriend, I have friends, I have lab colleagues, and I participate in a project with various people. Still, for all my life, I've struggled to interact with other people in social situations and to learn to do team work (and it's kind of a relief that [smart people like Brett Terspstra suffer from the same problem](http://www.relay.fm/mpu/287)). This Ph.D. project I'm on is my first real multi-people project I've been envolved in (I mean, apart from school projects), so it's an opportunity for improvement. There's something about my personality that makes me excel at working alone and isolated. For this past two days, I've been working from home, completely alone, and I've been able to do some great advances. Had I been at the university, in a room full of people, the output quality would certaily decrease. For the kind of work that I do -- creative, scientific, [deep work](http://calnewport.com/blog/2012/11/21/knowledge-workers-are-bad-at-working-and-heres-what-to-do-about-it/ )
 -- I cannot concentrate with people talking around me.

Now here's what is really strange about me: I like to work isolated, but not in secrecy. I love the open-source philosophy, and just this morning I read [the history about how the reformulated Wordpress.com went open-source](http://ma.tt/2015/11/dance-to-calypso/). Due to legal reasons, not all of my work can go open-source (and I still have to improve in separating bits of knowledge that *can* be open-sourced), but this openess philophy, of truly [showing your work](http://austinkleon.com/show-your-work/), resonates with me. So yes, I work from my home office, or sometimes even alone at the library, but when I push the changes to our GitHub repository, I want my advisors to be able to immediately track my progress. They can then check for errors, and suggest changes, and just manage our project, without having to calling or emailing me. This is a huge time saver.

Where do Jupyter notebooks enter in this scenario? Like I said [in the last post](http://thermocode.net/blog/jupyter/), my problem is to calculate the magnetic field in a certain geometry. I could write a Python program that I understand perfectly and push it to the GitHub repository, but my advisors don't know Python.  Yes, I could produce a report, but then I would have to make sure the results are always up to date and would have two maintain two files: the program and the report. Notebooks just make this easier: I work on them, alternating between writing text and code, and then I push the changes, GitHub takes care of rendering the notebook like a HTML report, ready to be inspected. See? I'm open about my work and I have literally zero to hide, even though some my work is private (in two senses: some of my results are not yet ready to be published, and I like to work in isolation)

I love using them so much that last week I found an interesting use case, actually just for notes. I'm using other software to do some more complicated numerical simulations, and I take care of placing all simulation files inside  Google Drive (as our lab recently adopted Google Apps for Education), so that everyone involved can access it. But again, my main advisor does not have this software installed in his machine, so I created a notebook just to store some notes (explaining what I'm doing), like a dynamic report (and without all the LaTeX boilerplate).

Accountability and documentation are important and frequently forgotten, and they're *part of the work* (I've never understood the "I'm done this project, I just have to write the report" mentality). If your work field is in any way related to mine, and you must produce LaTeX text and some programmatic calcualtions that you must show to someone, consider using Jupyter notebooks as a way of filling this gap.
